arXiv:1008.1290v2 [math.ST] 2 Nov 2012

The Annals of Statistics
2012, Vol. 40, No. 4, 1935вҖ“1967
DOI: 10.1214/11-AOS949
c Institute of Mathematical Statistics, 2012

LATENT VARIABLE GRAPHICAL MODEL SELECTION VIA
CONVEX OPTIMIZATION2
By Venkat Chandrasekaran, Pablo A. Parrilo and
Alan S. Willsky
California Institute of Technology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
and Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Suppose we observe samples of a subset of a collection of random
variables. No additional information is provided about the number
of latent variables, nor of the relationship between the latent and
observed variables. Is it possible to discover the number of latent
components, and to learn a statistical model over the entire collection of variables? We address this question in the setting in which
the latent and observed variables are jointly Gaussian, with the conditional statistics of the observed variables conditioned on the latent
variables being specified by a graphical model. As a first step we
give natural conditions under which such latent-variable Gaussian
graphical models are identifiable given marginal statistics of only the
observed variables. Essentially these conditions require that the conditional graphical model among the observed variables is sparse, while
the effect of the latent variables is вҖңspread outвҖқ over most of the observed variables. Next we propose a tractable convex program based
on regularized maximum-likelihood for model selection in this latentvariable setting; the regularizer uses both the в„“1 norm and the nuclear
norm. Our modeling framework can be viewed as a combination of
dimensionality reduction (to identify latent variables) and graphical
modeling (to capture remaining statistical structure not attributable
to the latent variables), and it consistently estimates both the numReceived August 2010; revised November 2011.
Discussed in 10.1214/12-AOS979, 10.1214/12-AOS980, 10.1214/12-AOS981,
10.1214/12-AOS984, 10.1214/12-AOS985 and 10.1214/12-AOS1001; rejoinder at
10.1214/12-AOS1020.
2
Supported in part by AFOSR Grant FA9550-08-1-0180, in part under a MURI through
AFOSR Grant FA9550-06-1-0324, in part under a MURI through AFOSR Grant FA955006-1-0303 and in part by NSF FRG 0757207.
AMS 2000 subject classifications. 62F12, 62H12.
Key words and phrases. Gaussian graphical models, covariance selection, latent variables, regularization, sparsity, low-rank, algebraic statistics, high-dimensional asymptotics.
1

This is an electronic reprint of the original article published by the
Institute of Mathematical Statistics in The Annals of Statistics,
2012, Vol. 40, No. 4, 1935вҖ“1967. This reprint differs from the original in
pagination and typographic detail.
1

2

V. CHANDRASEKARAN, P. A. PARRILO AND A. S. WILLSKY
ber of latent components and the conditional graphical model structure among the observed variables. These results are applicable in
the high-dimensional setting in which the number of latent/observed
variables grows with the number of samples of the observed variables.
The geometric properties of the algebraic varieties of sparse matrices
and of low-rank matrices play an important role in our analysis.

1. Introduction and setup. Statistical model selection in the high-dimensional regime arises in a number of applications. In many data analysis
problems in geophysics, radiology, genetics, climate studies, and image processing, the number of samples available is comparable to or even smaller
than the number of variables. As empirical statistics in these settings may
not be well-behaved (see [17, 22]), high-dimensional model selection is therefore both challenging and of great interest. A model selection problem that
has received considerable attention recently is the estimation of covariance
matrices in the high-dimensional setting. As the sample covariance matrix
is poorly behaved in such a regime, some form of regularization of the sample covariance is adopted based on assumptions about the true underlying
covariance matrix [1, 2, 12, 14, 20, 36].
Graphical models. A number of papers have studied covariance estimation in the context of Gaussian graphical model selection. A Gaussian graphical model [19, 30] (also commonly referred to as a GaussвҖ“Markov random
field) is a statistical model defined with respect to a graph, in which the
nodes index a collection of jointly Gaussian random variables and the edges
represent the conditional independence relations (Markov structure) among
the variables. In such models the sparsity pattern of the inverse of the covariance matrix, or the concentration matrix, directly corresponds to the
graphical model structure. Specifically, consider a Gaussian graphical model
in which the covariance matrix is given by a positive-definite ОЈвҲ— and the concentration matrix is given by K вҲ— = (ОЈвҲ— )вҲ’1 . Then an edge {i, j} is present in
вҲ— 6= 0. In particular the abthe underlying graphical model if and only if Ki,j
sence of an edge between two nodes implies that the corresponding variables
are independent conditioned on all the other variables. The model selection
method usually studied in such a Gaussian graphical model setting is в„“1 regularized maximum-likelihood, with the в„“1 penalty applied to the entries
of the concentration matrix to induce sparsity. The consistency properties
of such an estimator have been studied [18, 26, 29], and under suitable conditions [18, 26] this estimator is also вҖңsparsistent,вҖқ that is, the estimated
concentration matrix has the same sparsity pattern as the true model from
which the samples are generated. An alternative approach to в„“1 -regularized
maximum-likelihood is to estimate the sparsity pattern of the concentration
matrix by performing regression separately on each variable [23]; while such

LATENT VARIABLE MODEL SELECTION

3

a method consistently estimates the sparsity pattern, it does not directly
provide estimates of the covariance or concentration matrix.
In many applications throughout science and engineering (e.g., psychology, computational biology, and economics), a challenge is that one may not
have access to observations of all the relevant phenomena, that is, some of
the relevant variables may be latent or unobserved. In general latent variables pose a significant difficulty for model selection because one may not
know the number of relevant latent variables, nor the relationship between
these variables and the observed variables. Typical algorithmic methods that
try to get around this difficulty usually fix the number of latent variables
as well as the structural relationship between latent and observed variables
(e.g., the graphical model structure between latent and observed variables),
and use the EM algorithm to fit parameters [9]. This approach suffers from
the problem that one optimizes nonconvex functions, and thus one may
get stuck in suboptimal local minima. An alternative suggestion [13] is one
based on a greedy, local, combinatorial heuristic that assigns latent variables
to groups of observed variables, via some form of clustering of the observed
variables; however, this approach has no consistency guarantees.
Our setup. In this paper we study the problem of latent-variable graphical model selection in the setting where all the variables, both observed and
latent, are jointly Gaussian. More concretely, X is a Gaussian random vector
in Rp+h , O and H are disjoint subsets of indices in {1, . . . , p + h} of cardinalities |O| = p and |H| = h, and the corresponding subvectors of X are denoted
by XO and XH , respectively. Let the covariance matrix underlying X be denoted by ОЈвҲ—(O H) . The marginal statistics corresponding to the observed variables XO are given by the marginal covariance matrix ОЈвҲ—O , which is simply
a submatrix of the full covariance matrix ОЈвҲ—(O H) . However, suppose that we
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ’1
parameterize our model by the concentration matrix K(O
H) = (ОЈ(O H) ) ,
which as discussed above reveals the connection to graphical models. Here
вҲ— , KвҲ—
вҲ—
the submatrices KO
O,H , KH specify (in the full model) the dependencies
among the observed variables, between the observed and latent variables,
and among the latent variables, respectively. In such a parameterization,
the marginal concentration matrix (ОЈвҲ—O )вҲ’1 corresponding to the observed
variables XO is given by the Schur complement [16] with respect to the
вҲ—:
block KH
(1.1)

вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ— вҲ’1 вҲ—
KМғO
= (ОЈвҲ—O )вҲ’1 = KO
вҲ’ KO,H
(KH
) KH,O .

вҲ— ).
Thus if we only observe the variables XO , we only have access to ОЈвҲ—O (or KМғO
вҲ—
The two terms that compose KМғO above have interesting properties. The maвҲ— specifies the concentration matrix of the conditional statistics of the
trix KO
observed variables given the latent variables. If these conditional statistics

4

V. CHANDRASEKARAN, P. A. PARRILO AND A. S. WILLSKY

вҲ— is sparse. On the other hand,
are given by a sparse graphical model, then KO
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ’1
вҲ—
the matrix KO,H (KH ) KH,O serves as a summary of the effect of marginalization over the latent variables XH . This matrix has small rank if the number of latent, unobserved variables XH is small relative to the number of
вҲ— is
observed variables XO . Therefore the marginal concentration matrix KМғO
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ’1
вҲ—
generally not sparse due to the additional low-rank term KO,H (KH ) KH,O .
Hence standard graphical model selection techniques applied directly to the
observed variables XO are not useful.
A modeling paradigm that infers the effect of the latent variables XH
would be more suitable in order to provide a concise explanation of the underlying statistical structure. Hence we approximate the sample covariance
by a model in which the concentration matrix decomposes into the sum of a
sparse matrix and a low-rank matrix, which reveals the conditional graphical
model structure in the observed variables as well as the number of and effect
due to the unobserved latent variables. Such a method can be viewed as a
blend of principal component analysis and graphical modeling. In standard
graphical modeling one would directly approximate a concentration matrix
by a sparse matrix to learn a sparse graphical model, while in principal component analysis the goal is to explain the statistical structure underlying a
set of observations using a small number of latent variables (i.e., approximate a covariance matrix as a low-rank matrix). In our framework we learn
a sparse graphical model among the observed variables conditioned on a few
(additional) latent variables. These latent variables are not principal components, as the conditional statistics (conditioned on these latent variables)
are given by a graphical model. Therefore we refer to these latent variables
informally as latent components.

Contributions. Our first contribution in Section 3 is to address the fundamental question of identifiability of such latent-variable graphical models
given the marginal statistics of only the observed variables. The critical point
is that we need to tease apart the correlations induced due to marginalization over the latent variables from the conditional graphical model structure among the observed variables. As the identifiability problem is one of
uniquely decomposing the sum of a sparse matrix and a low-rank matrix
into the individual components, we study the algebraic varieties of sparse
matrices and low-rank matrices. An important theme in this paper is the
connection between the tangent spaces to these algebraic varieties and the
вҲ— ) denote the tangent space at
question of identifiability. Specifically let в„Ұ(KO
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ— )вҲ’1 K вҲ— )
KO to the algebraic variety of sparse matrices, and let T (KO,H
(KH
H,O
вҲ—
вҲ— )вҲ’1 K вҲ—
denote the tangent space at KO,H
(KH
to
the
algebraic
variety
of
H,O
вҲ—
low-rank matrices. Then the statistical question of identifiability of KO
вҲ—
вҲ— )вҲ’1 K вҲ—
вҲ—
and KO,H
(KH
H,O given KМғO is determined by the geometric notion of

LATENT VARIABLE MODEL SELECTION

5

вҲ— ) and T (K вҲ—
вҲ— вҲ’1 вҲ—
transversality of the tangent spaces в„Ұ(KO
O,H (KH ) KH,O ). The
study of the transversality of these tangent spaces leads to natural conditions
for identifiability. In particular we show that latent-variable models in which
вҲ— has a small number of nonzeros per row/column,
(1) the sparse matrix KO
вҲ—
вҲ— )вҲ’1 K вҲ—
and (2) the low-rank matrix KO,H
(KH
H,O has row/column spaces that
are not closely aligned with the coordinate axes, are identifiable. These conditions have natural statistical interpretations. The first condition ensures
that there are no densely connected subgraphs in the conditional graphical
model structure among the observed variables, that is, that these conditional statistics are indeed specified by a sparse graphical model. Such statistical relationships may otherwise be mistakenly attributed to the effect
of marginalization over some latent variable. The second condition ensures
that the effect of marginalization over the latent variables is вҖңspread outвҖқ
over many observed variables; thus, the effect of marginalization over a latent variable is not confused with the conditional graphical model structure
among the observed variables. In fact the first condition is often assumed in
standard graphical model selection without latent variables (e.g., [26]).
As our next contribution we propose a regularized maximum-likelihood
decomposition framework to approximate a given sample covariance matrix
by a model in which the concentration matrix decomposes into a sparse
matrix and a low-rank matrix. Based on the effectiveness of the в„“1 norm as
a tractable convex relaxation for recovering sparse models [5, 10, 11] and
the nuclear norm for low-rank matrices [4, 15, 27], we propose the following
penalized likelihood method given a sample covariance matrix ОЈnO formed
from n samples of the observed variables:

(SМӮn , LМӮn ) = arg min вҲ’в„“(S вҲ’ L; ОЈnO ) + О»n (ОіkSk1 + tr(L))
(1.2)

S,L

s.t. S вҲ’ L вү» 0, L  0.
The constraints вү» 0 and  0 impose positive-definiteness and positive-semidefiniteness. The function в„“ represents the Gaussian log-likelihood в„“(K; ОЈ) =
log det(K) вҲ’ tr(KОЈ) for K вү» 0, where tr is the trace of a matrix and det is
вҲ— , which represents the
the determinant. Here SМӮn provides an estimate of KO
conditional concentration matrix of the observed variables; LМӮn provides an
вҲ—
вҲ— )вҲ’1 K вҲ— , which represents the effect of marginalizaestimate of KO,H
(KH
H,O
tion over the latent variables. The regularizer is a combination of the в„“1 norm
applied to S and the nuclear norm applied to L (the nuclear norm reduces to
the trace over the cone of symmetric, positive-semidefinite matrices), with
Оі providing a trade-off between the two terms. This variational formulation
is a convex optimization problem, and it is a regularized max-det program
that can be solved in polynomial time using general-purpose solvers [33].

6

V. CHANDRASEKARAN, P. A. PARRILO AND A. S. WILLSKY

Our main result in Section 4 is a proof of the consistency of the estimator (1.2) in the high-dimensional regime in which both the number of observed variables and the number of latent components are allowed to grow
with the number of samples (of the observed variables). We show that for
a suitable choice of the regularization parameter О»n , there exists a range
of values of Оі for which the estimates (SМӮn , LМӮn ) have the same sparsity (and
вҲ— , KвҲ—
вҲ— вҲ’1 вҲ—
sign) pattern and rank as (KO
O,H (KH ) KH,O ) with high probability
(see Theorem 4.1). The key technical requirement is an identifiability conвҲ—
dition for the two components of the marginal concentration matrix KМғO
with respect to the Fisher information (see Section 3.4). We make connections between our condition and the irrepresentability conditions required for
support/graphical-model recovery using в„“1 regularization [26, 32, 37]. Our
results provide numerous scaling regimes under which consistency holds in
latent-variable graphical model selection. For example, we show that under
suitable identifiability conditions consistent model selection is possible even
when the number of samples and the number of latent variables are on the
same order as the number of observed variables (see Section 4.2).
Related previous work. The problem of decomposing the sum of a sparse
matrix and a low-rank matrix via convex optimization into the individual
components was initially studied in [7] by a superset of the authors of the
present paper, with conditions derived under which the convex program exactly recovers the underlying components. In subsequent work CandeМҖs et
al. [3] also studied this sparse-plus-low-rank decomposition problem, and
provided guarantees for exact recovery using the convex program proposed
in [7]. The problem setup considered in the present paper is quite different and is more challenging because we are only given access to an inexact
sample covariance matrix, and we wish to produce an inverse covariance
matrix that can be decomposed as the sum of sparse and low-rank components (preserving the sparsity pattern and rank of the components in the
true underlying model). In addition to proving the consistency of the estimator (1.2), we also provide a statistical interpretation of our identifiability
conditions and describe natural classes of latent-variable Gaussian graphical models that satisfy these conditions. As such our paper is closer in spirit
to the many recent papers on covariance selection, but with the important
difference that some of the variables are not observed.
Outline. Section 2 gives some background and a formal problem statement. Section 3 discusses the identifiability question, Section 4 states the
main results of this paper, and Section 5 gives some proofs. We provide experimental demonstration of the effectiveness of our estimator on synthetic
and real data in Section 6, and conclude with a brief discussion in Section 7.
Some of our technical results are deferred to supplementary material [6].

LATENT VARIABLE MODEL SELECTION

7

2. Problem statement and background. We give a formal statement of
the latent-variable model selection problem. We also briefly describe various properties of the algebraic varieties of sparse matrices and of low-rank
matrices, and the properties of the Gaussian likelihood function.
The following matrix norms are employed throughout this paper. kM k2
denotes the spectral norm, or the largest singular value of M . kM kвҲһ denotes the largest entry in magnitude of M . kM kF denotes the Frobenius
norm, or the square root of the sum of the squares of the entries of M .
kM kвҲ— denotes the nuclear norm, or the sum of the singular values of M
(this reduces to the trace for positive-semidefinite matrices). kM k1 denotes
the sum of the absolute values of the entries of M . A number of matrix
operator norms are also used. For example, let Z : RpГ—p вҶ’ RpГ—p be a linear operator acting on matrices. Then the induced operator norm is defined
as kZkqвҶ’q , maxN вҲҲRpГ—p ,kN kq вүӨ1 kZ(N )kq . Therefore, kZkF вҶ’F denotes the
spectral norm of the operator Z. The only vector norm used is the Euclidean norm, which is denoted by k В· k. Given any norm k В· kq (either a
vector norm, a matrix norm or a matrix operator norm), the dual norm is
given by kM kвҲ—q , sup{hM, N i|kN kq вүӨ 1}.
2.1. Problem statement. In order to analyze latent-variable model selection methods, we need to define an appropriate notion of model selection
consistency for latent-variable graphical models. Given the two components
вҲ— and K вҲ—
вҲ— вҲ’1 вҲ—
KO
O,H (KH ) KH,O of the concentration matrix of the marginal distribution (1.1), there are infinitely many configurations of the latent variвҲ— вү» 0, K вҲ—
вҲ—
T
ables [i.e., matrices KH
O,H = (KH,O ) ] that give rise to the same
вҲ—
вҲ— )вҲ’1 K вҲ— . Specifically for any nonsingular matrix
low-rank matrix KO,H
(KH
H,O
вҲ— вҶ’ BK вҲ— B T , K вҲ—
B вҲҲ R|H|Г—|H| , one can apply the transformations KH
H
O,H вҶ’
вҲ—
T
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ’1
вҲ—
KO,H B and still preserve the low-rank matrix KO,H (KH ) KH,O . In all of
these models the marginal statistics of the observed variables XO remain the
same upon marginalization over the latent variables XH . The key invariant
вҲ—
вҲ— )вҲ’1 K вҲ— , which summarizes the effect of
is the low-rank matrix KO,H
(KH
H,O
marginalization over the latent variables. Consequently, from here on we use
вҲ— and LвҲ— = K вҲ—
вҲ— вҲ’1 вҲ—
the notation S вҲ— = KO
O,H (KH ) KH,O . These observations give
rise to the following notion of structure recovery.
Definition 2.1. A pair of |O| Г— |O| symmetric matrices (SМӮ, LМӮ) is an
algebraically correct estimate of a latent-variable Gaussian graphical model
вҲ—
given by the concentration matrix K(O
H) if the following conditions hold:
(1) The sign-pattern of SМӮ is the same as that of S вҲ— [here sign(0) = 0]:
вҲ—
sign(SМӮi,j ) = sign(Si,j
)

вҲҖi, j.

8

V. CHANDRASEKARAN, P. A. PARRILO AND A. S. WILLSKY

(2) The rank of LМӮ is the same as the rank of LвҲ— :
rank(LМӮ) = rank(LвҲ— ).
(3) The concentration matrix SМӮ вҲ’ LМӮ can be realized as the marginal concentration matrix of an appropriate latent-variable model:
SМӮ вҲ’ LМӮ вү» 0,

LМӮ  0.

When a sequence of estimators is algebraically correct with probability
approaching 1 in a suitable high-dimensional scaling regime, then we say that
the estimators are algebraically consistent. The first condition ensures that SМӮ
provides the correct structural estimate of the conditional graphical model of
the observed variables conditioned on the latent components. This property
is the same as the вҖңsparsistencyвҖқ property studied in standard graphical
model selection [18, 26]. The second condition ensures that the number of
latent components is properly estimated. Finally, the third condition ensures
that the pair of matrices (SМӮ, LМӮ) leads to a realizable latent-variable model.
In particular, this condition implies that there exists a valid latent-variable
model in which (a) the conditional graphical model structure among the
observed variables is given by SМӮ, (b) the number of latent variables is equal to
the rank of LМӮ, and (c) the extra correlations induced due to marginalization
over the latent variables are equal to LМӮ. Any method for matrix factorization
(e.g., [35]) can be used to further factorize LМӮ, depending on the property that
one desires in the factors (e.g., sparsity).
We also study estimation error rates in the usual sense, that is, we show
that one can produce estimates (SМӮ, LМӮ) that are close in various norms to
the matrices (S вҲ— , LвҲ— ). Notice that bounding the estimation error in some
norm does not in general imply that the support/sign-pattern and rank of
(SМӮ, LМӮ) are the same as those of (S вҲ— , LвҲ— ). Therefore bounded estimation error
is different from algebraic correctness, which requires that (SМӮ, LМӮ) have the
same support/sign-pattern and rank as (S вҲ— , LвҲ— ).
вҲ—
Goal. Let K(O
H) denote the concentration matrix of a Gaussian model.
i }n
Suppose that we have n samples {XO
i=1 of the observed variables XO .
We would like to produce estimates (SМӮn , LМӮn ) that, with high probability, are
algebraically correct and have bounded estimation error (in some norm).

Our approach. We propose the regularized likelihood convex program
(1.2) to produce estimates (SМӮn , LМӮn ). Specifically, the sample covariance matrix ОЈnO in (1.2) is defined as
n

ОЈnO ,

1X i iT
XO XO .
n
i=1

LATENT VARIABLE MODEL SELECTION

9

вҲ—
We give conditions on the underlying model K(O
H) and suitable choices for

the parameters О»n , Оі under which the estimates (SМӮn , LМӮn ) are consistent (see
Theorem 4.1).
2.2. Likelihood function and Fisher information. Given n samples {X i }ni=1
of a finite collection of jointly Gaussian zero-mean random variables with
concentration matrix K вҲ— , it is easily seen that the log-likelihood function is
given by:
(2.1)

в„“(K; ОЈn ) = log det(K) вҲ’ tr(KОЈn ),

where в„“(K; ОЈn ) is a function of K. Notice that this function is strictly concave for K вү» 0. In the latent-variable modeling problem with sample covariance ОЈnO , the likelihood function with respect to the parametrization (S, L)
is given by в„“(S вҲ’ L; ОЈnO ). This function is jointly concave with respect to the
parameters (S, L) whenever S вҲ’ L вү» 0, and it is employed in our variational
formulation (1.2) to learn a latent-variable model.
In the analysis of a convex program involving the likelihood function, the
Fisher information plays an important role as it is the negative of the Hessian
of the likelihood function and thus controls the curvature. As the first term
in the likelihood function is linear, we need only study higher-order derivatives of the log-determinant function in order to compute the Hessian. In
the latent-variable setting with the marginal concentration matrix of the obвҲ— = (ОЈвҲ— )вҲ’1 [see (1.1)], the corresponding Fisher
served variables given by KМғO
O
information matrix is
(2.2)

вҲ— вҲ’1
вҲ— вҲ’1
вҲ—
) = ОЈвҲ—O вҠ— ОЈвҲ—O .
) вҠ— (KМғO
) = (KМғO
I(KМғO

Here вҠ— denotes the tensor product between matrices. Notice that this is
precisely the |O|2 Г— |O|2 submatrix of the full Fisher information matrix
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
вҲ—
I(K(O
H) ) = ОЈ(O H) вҠ— ОЈ(O H) with respect to all the parameters K(O H) =
(ОЈвҲ—(O H) )вҲ’1 (corresponding to the situation in which all the variables XOвҲӘH
are observed). In Section 3.4 we impose various conditions on the Fisher
вҲ— ) under which our regularized maximum-likelihood
information matrix I(KМғO
formulation provides consistent estimates.
2.3. Algebraic varieties of sparse and low-rank matrices. The set of sparse
matrices and the set of low-rank matrices can be naturally viewed as algebraic varieties (solution sets of systems of polynomial equations). Here we
describe these varieties, and discuss some of their geometric properties such
as the tangent space and local curvature at a (smooth) point.
Let S(k) denote the set of matrices with at most k nonzeros:
(2.3)

S(k) , {M вҲҲ RpГ—p ||support(M )| вүӨ k}.

Here support denotes the locations of nonzero entries. The set S(k) is an
2
algebraic variety, and can in fact be viewed as a union of pk subspaces in

10

V. CHANDRASEKARAN, P. A. PARRILO AND A. S. WILLSKY

RpГ—p . This variety has dimension k, and it is smooth everywhere except at
those matrices that have support size strictly smaller than k. For any matrix
M вҲҲ RpГ—p , consider the variety S(|support(M )|); M is a smooth point of this
variety, and the tangent space at M is given by
(2.4)

в„Ұ(M ) = {N вҲҲ RpГ—p |support(N ) вҠҶ support(M )}.

Next let L(r) denote the algebraic variety of matrices with rank at most r:
(2.5)

L(r) , {M вҲҲ RpГ—p |rank(M ) вүӨ r}.

It is easily seen that L(r) is an algebraic variety because it can be defined
through the vanishing of all (r + 1) Г— (r + 1) minors. This variety has dimension equal to r(2p вҲ’ r), and it is smooth everywhere except at those
matrices that have rank strictly smaller than r. Consider a rank-r matrix
M with singular value decomposition (SVD) given by M = U DV T , where
U, V вҲҲ RpГ—r and D вҲҲ RrГ—r . The matrix M is a smooth point of the variety
L(rank(M )), and the tangent space at M with respect to this variety is
given by
(2.6)

T (M ) = {U Y1T + Y2 V T |Y1 , Y2 вҲҲ RpГ—r }.

We view both в„Ұ(M ) and T (M ) as subspaces in RpГ—p . In Section 3 we explore
the connection between geometric properties of these tangent spaces and the
identifiability problem in latent-variable graphical models.
Curvature of rank variety. The sparse matrix variety S(k) has the property that it has zero curvature at any smooth point. The situation is more
complicated for the low-rank matrix variety L(r), because the curvature at
any smooth point is nonzero. We analyze how this variety curves locally, by
studying how the tangent space changes from one point to a neighboring
point. Indeed the amount of curvature at a point is directly related to the
вҖңangleвҖқ between the tangent space at that point and the tangent space at a
neighboring point. For any linear subspace T of matrices, let PT denote the
projection onto T . Given two subspaces T1 , T2 of the same dimension, we
measure the вҖңtwistingвҖқ between these subspaces by considering the following
quantity:
(2.7)

ПҒ(T1 , T2 ) , kPT1 вҲ’ PT2 k2вҶ’2 = max k[PT1 вҲ’ PT2 ](N )k2 .
kN k2 вүӨ1

In the supplement [6] we review relevant results from matrix perturbation
theory, which suggest that the magnitude of the smallest nonzero singular
value is closely tied to the local curvature of the variety. Therefore we control the twisting between tangent spaces at nearby points by bounding the
smallest nonzero singular value away from zero.
3. Identifiability. In the absence of additional conditions, the latentvariable model selection problem is ill-posed. In this section we discuss a
set of conditions on latent-variable models that ensure that these mod-

LATENT VARIABLE MODEL SELECTION

11

els are identifiable given marginal statistics for a subset of the variables.
Some of the discussion in Sections 3.1 and 3.2 is presented in greater detail
in [7].
3.1. Structure between latent and observed variables. Suppose that the
low-rank matrix that summarizes the effect of the latent components is itself sparse. This leads to identifiability issues in the sparse-plus-low-rank decomposition problem. Statistically the additional correlations induced due
to marginalization over the latent variables could be mistaken for the conditional graphical model structure of the observed variables. In order to
avoid such identifiability problems the effect of the latent variables must be
вҖңdiffuseвҖқ across the observed variables. To address this point the following
quantity was introduced in [7] for any matrix M , defined with respect to
the tangent space T (M ):
(3.1)

Оҫ(T (M )) ,

max

kN kвҲһ .

N вҲҲT (M ),kN k2 вүӨ1

Thus Оҫ(T (M )) being small implies that elements of the tangent space T (M )
cannot have their support concentrated in a few locations; as a result M
cannot be too sparse. This idea is formalized in [7] by relating Оҫ(T (M )) to
a notion of вҖңincoherenceвҖқ of the row/column spaces, where the row/column
spaces are said to be incoherent with respect to the standard basis if these
spaces are not aligned closely with any of the coordinate axes. Typically
a matrix M with incoherent row/column spaces would have Оҫ(T (M )) вүӘ 1.
This point is quantified
q precisely in [7]. Specifically, we note that Оҫ(T (M ))
can be as small as вҲј pr for a rank-r matrix M вҲҲ RpГ—p with row/column

spaces that are almost maximally incoherent (e.g., if the row/column spaces
span any r columns of a p Г— p orthonormal Hadamard matrix). On the other
hand, Оҫ(T (M )) = 1 if the row/column spaces of M contain a standard basis
vector.
Based on these concepts we roughly require that the low-rank matrix that
summarizes the effect of the latent variables be incoherent, thereby ensuring
that the extra correlations due to marginalization over the latent components cannot be confused with the conditional graphical model structure of
the observed variables. Notice that the quantity Оҫ is not just a measure of the
number of latent variables, but also of the overall effect of the correlations
induced by marginalization over these variables.
Curvature and change in Оҫ: As noted previously, an important technical
point is that the algebraic variety of low-rank matrices is locally curved at
any smooth point. Consequently the quantity Оҫ changes as we move along
the low-rank matrix variety smoothly. The quantity ПҒ(T1 , T2 ) introduced
in (2.7) allows us to bound the variation in Оҫ as follows (proof in Section 5):

12

V. CHANDRASEKARAN, P. A. PARRILO AND A. S. WILLSKY

Lemma 3.1. Let T1 , T2 be two linear subspaces of matrices of the same
dimension with the property that ПҒ(T1 , T2 ) < 1, where ПҒ is defined in (2.7).
Then we have that
1
[Оҫ(T1 ) + ПҒ(T1 , T2 )].
Оҫ(T2 ) вүӨ
1 вҲ’ ПҒ(T1 , T2 )
3.2. Structure among observed variables. An identifiability problem also
arises if the conditional graphical model among the observed variables contains a densely connected subgraph. These statistical relationships might be
mistaken as correlations induced by marginalization over latent variables.
Therefore we need to ensure that the conditional graphical model among
the observed variables is sparse. We impose the condition that this conditional graphical model must have small вҖңdegree,вҖқ that is, no observed
variable is directly connected to too many other observed variables conditioned on the latent components. Notice that bounding the degree is a more
refined condition than simply bounding the total number of nonzeros as the
sparsity pattern also plays a role. In [7] the authors introduced the following
quantity in order to provide an appropriate measure of the sparsity pattern
of a matrix:
(3.2)

Вө(в„Ұ(M )) ,

max

kN k2 .

N вҲҲв„Ұ(M ),kN kвҲһ вүӨ1

The quantity Вө(в„Ұ(M )) being small for a matrix implies that the spectrum of
any element of the tangent space в„Ұ(M ) is not too вҖңconcentrated,вҖқ that is, the
singular values of the elements of the tangent space are not too large. In [7]
it is shown that a sparse matrix M with вҖңbounded degreeвҖқ (a small number
of nonzeros per row/column) has small Вө(M ). Specifically, if M вҲҲ RpГ—p is
any matrix with at most deg(M ) nonzero entries per row/column, then we
have that
Вө(в„Ұ(M )) вүӨ deg(M ).
3.3. Transversality of tangent spaces. Suppose that we have the sum of
two vectors, each from two known subspaces. It is possible to uniquely recover the individual vectors from the sum if and only if the subspaces have a
transverse intersection, that is, they only intersect at the origin. This simple
observation leads to an appealing geometric notion of identifiability. Suppose now that we have the sum of a sparse matrix and a low-rank matrix,
and that we are also given the tangent spaces at these matrices with respect to the algebraic varieties of sparse and low-rank matrices, respectively.
Then a necessary and sufficient condition for identifiability with respect to
the tangent spaces is that these spaces have a transverse intersection. This
transverse intersection condition is also sufficient for local identifiability in

LATENT VARIABLE MODEL SELECTION

13

a neighborhood around the sparse matrix and low-rank matrix with respect
to the varieties of sparse and low-rank matrices (due to the inverse function
theorem). It turns out that these tangent space transversality conditions are
also sufficient for the convex program (1.2) to provide consistent estimates
of a latent-variable graphical model (without any side information about the
tangent spaces).
In order to quantify the level of transversality between the tangent spaces
в„Ұ and T we study the minimum gain with respect to some norm of the addition operator (which adds two matrices) A : RpГ—p Г— RpГ—p вҶ’ RpГ—p restricted
to the cartesian product Y = в„Ұ Г— T . Then given any matrix norm k В· kq on
RpГ—p Г— RpГ—p , the minimum gain of A restricted to Y is defined as
Оө(в„Ұ, T, k В· kq ) ,

min

kPY AвҖ  APY (S, L)kq ,

(S,L)вҲҲв„ҰГ—T,k(S,L)kq =1

where PY denotes the projection onto Y, and AвҖ  denotes the adjoint of the
addition operator (with respect to the standard Euclidean inner-product).
The вҖңlevelвҖқ of transversality of в„Ұ and T is measured by the magnitude of
Оө(в„Ұ, T, k В· kq ), with transverse intersection being equivalent to Оө(в„Ұ, T, k В· kq ) >
0. Note that Оө(в„Ұ, T, k В· kF ) is the square of the minimum singular value of
the addition operator A restricted to в„Ұ Г— T .
A natural norm with which to measure transversality is the dual norm
of the regularization function in (1.2), as the subdifferential of the regularization function is specified in terms of its dual. The reasons for this will
become clearer as we proceed through this paper. Recall that the regularization function used in the variational formulation (1.2) is given by
fОі (S, L) = ОіkSk1 + kLkвҲ— ,

where the nuclear norm k В· kвҲ— reduces to the trace function over the cone
of positive-semidefinite matrices. This function is a norm for all Оі > 0. The
dual norm of fОі is given by


kSkвҲһ
gОі (S, L) = max
, kLk2 .
Оі
Next we define the quantity ПҮ(в„Ұ, T, Оі) as follows in order to study the
transversality of the spaces в„Ұ and T with respect to the gОі norm:


Оҫ(T )
(3.3)
, 2Вө(в„Ұ)Оі .
ПҮ(в„Ұ, T, Оі) , max
Оі
Here Вө and Оҫ are defined in (3.2) and (3.1). We then have the following
result (proved in Section 5):

Lemma 3.2. Let S вҲҲ в„Ұ, L вҲҲ T be matrices such that kSkвҲһ = Оі and
let kLk2 = 1. Then we have that gОі (PY AвҖ  APY (S, L)) вҲҲ [1 вҲ’ ПҮ(в„Ұ, T, Оі), 1 +
ПҮ(в„Ұ, T, Оі)], where Y = в„Ұ Г— T and ПҮ(в„Ұ, T, Оі) is defined in (3.3). In particular
we have that 1 вҲ’ ПҮ(в„Ұ, T, Оі) вүӨ Оө(в„Ұ, T, gОі ).

14

V. CHANDRASEKARAN, P. A. PARRILO AND A. S. WILLSKY

The quantity ПҮ(в„Ұ, T, Оі) being small implies that the addition operator
is essentially isometric when restricted to Y = в„Ұ Г— T . Stated differently,
the magnitude of ПҮ(в„Ұ, T, Оі) is a measure of the level of transversality of
1
the spaces в„Ұ and T . If Вө(в„Ұ)Оҫ(T ) < 12 , then Оі вҲҲ (Оҫ(T ), 2Вө(в„Ұ)
) ensures that
ПҮ(в„Ұ, T, Оі) < 1, which in turn implies that the tangent spaces в„Ұ and T have
a transverse intersection.
Observation: Thus we have that the smaller the quantities Вө(в„Ұ) and Оҫ(T ),
the more transverse the intersection of the spaces в„Ұ and T as measured by
Оө(в„Ұ, T, gОі ).
3.4. Conditions on Fisher information. The main focus of Section 4
is to analyze the regularized maximum-likelihood convex program (1.2)
by studying its optimality conditions. The log-likelihood function is wellapproximated in a neighborhood by a quadratic form given by the Fisher
information (which measures the curvature, as discussed in Section 2.2). Let
вҲ— ) denote the Fisher information evaluated at the true marginal
I вҲ— = I(KМғO
вҲ— [see (1.1)]. The appropriate measure of transverconcentration matrix KМғO
sality between the tangent spaces2 в„Ұ = в„Ұ(S вҲ— ) and T = T (LвҲ— ) is then in a
space in which the inner-product is given by I вҲ— . Specifically, we need to
analyze the minimum gain of the operator PY AвҖ  I вҲ— APY restricted to the
space Y = в„Ұ Г— T . Therefore we impose several conditions on the Fisher information I вҲ— . We define quantities that control the gains of I вҲ— restricted to
в„Ұ and T separately; these ensure that elements of в„Ұ and elements of T are
individually identifiable under the map I вҲ— . In addition we define quantities
that, in conjunction with bounds on Вө(в„Ұ) and Оҫ(T ), allow us to control the
gain of I вҲ— restricted to the direct-sum в„Ұ вҠ• T .
I вҲ— restricted to в„Ұ: The minimum gain of the operator Pв„Ұ I вҲ— Pв„Ұ restricted
to в„Ұ is given by
Оұв„Ұ ,

kPв„Ұ I вҲ— Pв„Ұ (M )kвҲһ .

min

M вҲҲв„Ұ,kM kвҲһ =1

The maximum effect of elements in в„Ұ in the orthogonal direction в„ҰвҠҘ is given
by
Оҙв„Ұ ,

max

kPв„ҰвҠҘ I вҲ— Pв„Ұ (M )kвҲһ .

M вҲҲв„Ұ,kM kвҲһ =1

The operator I вҲ— is injective on в„Ұ if Оұв„Ұ > 0. The ratio ОұОҙв„Ұв„Ұ вүӨ 1 вҲ’ ОҪ implies the
irrepresentability condition imposed in [26], which gives a sufficient condition for consistent recovery of graphical model structure using в„“1 -regularized
maximum-likelihood. Notice that this condition is a generalization of the
2

We implicitly assume that these tangent spaces are subspaces of the space of symmetric
matrices.

LATENT VARIABLE MODEL SELECTION

15

usual Lasso irrepresentability conditions [32, 37], which are typically imposed on the covariance matrix. Finally we also consider the following quantity, which controls the behavior of I вҲ— restricted to в„Ұ in the spectral norm:
ОІв„Ұ ,

max

M вҲҲв„Ұ,kM k2 =1

kI вҲ— (M )k2 .

I вҲ— restricted to T : Analogously to the case of в„Ұ one could control the gains
of the operators PT вҠҘ I вҲ— PT and PT I вҲ— PT . However, as discussed previously,
one complication is that the tangent spaces at nearby smooth points on the
rank variety are in general different, and the amount of twisting between
these spaces is governed by the local curvature. Therefore we control the
gains of the operators PT вҖІвҠҘ I вҲ— PT вҖІ and PT вҖІ I вҲ— PT вҖІ for all tangent spaces T вҖІ
that are вҖңclose toвҖқ the nominal T (at the true underlying low-rank matrix),
measured by ПҒ(T, T вҖІ ) (2.7) being small. The minimum gain of the operator
PT вҖІ I вҲ— PT вҖІ restricted to T вҖІ (close to T ) is given by
ОұT ,

min

min

ПҒ(T вҖІ ,T )вүӨОҫ(T )/2 M вҲҲT вҖІ ,kM k2 =1

kPT вҖІ I вҲ— PT вҖІ (M )k2 .

Similarly, the maximum effect of elements in T вҖІ in the orthogonal direction
T вҖІвҠҘ (for T вҖІ close to T ) is given by
ОҙT ,

max

max

ПҒ(T вҖІ ,T )вүӨОҫ(T )/2 M вҲҲT вҖІ ,kM k2 =1

kPT вҖІвҠҘ I вҲ— PT вҖІ (M )k2 .

Implicit in the definition of ОұT and ОҙT is the fact that the outer minimum
and maximum are only taken over spaces T вҖІ that are tangent spaces to
the rank-variety. The operator I вҲ— is injective on all tangent spaces T вҖІ such
)
that ПҒ(T вҖІ , T ) вүӨ Оҫ(T
2 if ОұT > 0. An irrepresentability condition (analogous to
those developed for the sparse case) for tangent spaces near T to the rank
variety would be that ОұОҙTT вүӨ 1 вҲ’ ОҪ. Finally we also control the behavior of I вҲ—
restricted to T вҖІ close to T in the в„“вҲһ norm:
ОІT ,

max

max

kI вҲ— (M )kвҲһ .

ПҒ(T вҖІ ,T )вүӨОҫ(T )/2 M вҲҲT вҖІ ,kM kвҲһ =1

The two sets of quantities (Оұв„Ұ , Оҙв„Ұ ) and (ОұT , ОҙT ) essentially control how
I вҲ— behaves when restricted to the spaces в„Ұ and T separately (in the natural
norms). The quantities ОІв„Ұ and ОІT are useful in order to control the gains of
the operator I вҲ— restricted to the direct sum в„Ұ вҠ• T . Notice that although the
magnitudes of elements in в„Ұ are measured most naturally in the в„“вҲһ norm,
the quantity ОІв„Ұ is specified with respect to the spectral norm. Similarly,
elements of the tangent spaces T вҖІ to the rank variety are most naturally
measured in the spectral norm, but ОІT provides control in the в„“вҲһ norm.
These quantities, combined with Вө(в„Ұ) and Оҫ(T ) [defined in (3.2) and (3.1)],
provide the вҖңcouplingвҖқ necessary to control the behavior of I вҲ— restricted to

16

V. CHANDRASEKARAN, P. A. PARRILO AND A. S. WILLSKY

elements in the direct sum в„Ұ вҠ• T . In order to keep track of fewer quantities,
we summarize the six quantities as follows:
Оұ , min(Оұв„Ұ , ОұT );

Оҙ , max(Оҙв„Ұ , ОҙT );

ОІ , max(ОІв„Ұ , ОІT ).

Main assumption: There exists a ОҪ вҲҲ (0, 12 ] such that
Оҙ
вүӨ 1 вҲ’ 2ОҪ.
Оұ
This assumption is to be viewed as a generalization of the irrepresentability conditions imposed on the covariance matrix [32, 37] or the Fisher information matrix [26] in order to provide consistency guarantees for sparse
model selection using the в„“1 norm. With this assumption we have the following proposition, proved in Section 5, about the gains of the operator I вҲ—
restricted to в„Ұ вҠ• T . This proposition plays a fundamental role in the analysis
of the performance of the regularized maximum-likelihood procedure (1.2).
Specifically, it gives conditions under which a suitable primal-dual pair can
be specified to certify optimality with respect to (1.2) (see Section 5.2 for
more details).
Proposition 3.3. Let в„Ұ and T be the tangent spaces defined in this
section, and let I вҲ— be the Fisher information evaluated at the true marginal
concentration matrix. Further let Оұ, ОІ, ОҪ be as defined above. Suppose that

2
1
ОҪОұ
Вө(в„Ұ)Оҫ(T ) вүӨ
,
6 ОІ(2 вҲ’ ОҪ)
and that Оі is in the following range:


ОҪОұ
3Оҫ(T )ОІ(2 вҲ’ ОҪ)
,
.
ОівҲҲ
ОҪОұ
2Вө(в„Ұ)ОІ(2 вҲ’ ОҪ)

Then we have the following two conclusions for Y = в„Ұ Г— T вҖІ with ПҒ(T вҖІ , T ) вүӨ
Оҫ(T )
2 :
(1) The minimum gain of I вҲ— restricted to в„Ұ вҠ• T вҖІ is bounded below:
Оұ
min
gОі (PY AвҖ  I вҲ— APY (S, L)) вүҘ .
2
(S,L)вҲҲY,kSkвҲһ =Оі,kLk2 =1
Specifically this implies that for all (S, L) вҲҲ Y
Оұ
gОі (S, L).
2
(2) The effect of elements in Y = в„Ұ Г— T вҖІ on the orthogonal complement
вҠҘ
Y = в„ҰвҠҘ Г— T вҖІвҠҘ is bounded above:
gОі (PY AвҖ  I вҲ— APY (S, L)) вүҘ

kPY вҠҘ AвҖ  I вҲ— APY (PY AвҖ  I вҲ— APY )вҲ’1 kgОі вҶ’gОі вүӨ 1 вҲ’ ОҪ.

Specifically this implies that for all (S, L) вҲҲ Y

gОі (PY вҠҘ AвҖ  I вҲ— APY (S, L)) вүӨ (1 вҲ’ ОҪ)gОі (PY AвҖ  I вҲ— APY (S, L)).

LATENT VARIABLE MODEL SELECTION

17

The last quantity we consider is the spectral norm of the marginal covariвҲ— )вҲ’1 :
ance matrix ОЈвҲ—O = (KМғO
(3.4)

вҲ— вҲ’1
ПҲ , kОЈвҲ—O k2 = k(KМғO
) k2 .

A bound on ПҲ is useful in the probabilistic component of our analysis, in
order to derive convergence rates of the sample covariance matrix to the
true covariance matrix. We also observe that
вҲ— вҲ’1
вҲ— вҲ’1
kI вҲ— k2вҶ’2 = k(KМғO
) вҠ— (KМғO
) k2вҶ’2 = ПҲ 2 .

Remarks. The quantities Оұ, ОІ, Оҙ bound the gains of the Fisher information I вҲ— restricted to the spaces в„Ұ and T (and tangent spaces near T ). One
can make stronger assumptions on I вҲ— that are more easily interpretable.
For example, Оұв„Ұ , ОІв„Ұ could bound the minimum/maximum gains of I вҲ— for
all matrices (rather than just those in в„Ұ), and Оҙв„Ұ the I вҲ— -inner-product
for all pairs of orthogonal matrices (rather than just those in в„Ұ and в„ҰвҠҘ ).
Similarly, ОұT , ОІT could bound the minimum/maximum gains of I вҲ— for all
matrices (rather than just those near T ), and ОҙT the I вҲ— -inner-product for
all pairs of orthogonal matrices (rather than just those near T and T вҠҘ ).
Such bounds would apply in either the k В· k2вҶ’2 norm (for ОұT , ОҙT , ОІв„Ұ ) or the
k В· kвҲһвҶ’вҲһ norm (for Оұв„Ұ , Оҙв„Ұ , ОІT ). These modified assumptions are global in
nature (not restricted just to в„Ұ or near T ) and are consequently stronger
(they lower-bound the original Оұв„Ұ , ОұT and they upper-bound the original
ОІв„Ұ , ОІT , Оҙв„Ұ , ОҙT ), and they essentially control the gains of the operator I вҲ— in
the k В· k2вҶ’2 norm and the k В· kвҲһвҶ’вҲһ norm. In contrast, previous works on
covariance selection [1, 2, 29] consider well-conditioned families of covariance
matrices by bounding the minimum/maximum eigenvalues (i.e., gain with
respect to the spectral norm).
4. Consistency of regularized maximum-likelihood program.
вҲ—
4.1. Main results. Recall that K(O
H) denotes the full concentration matrix of a collection of zero-mean jointly-Gaussian observed and latent variables. Let p = |O| denote the number of observed variables, and let h = |H|
i }n
denote the number of latent variables. We are given n samples {XO
i=1
of the observed variables XO . We consider the high-dimensional setting
in which (p, h, n) are all allowed to grow simultaneously. We present our
main result next demonstrating the consistency of the estimator (1.2), and
then discuss classes of latent-variable graphical models and various scaling
regimes in which our estimator is consistent. Recall from (1.2) that О»n is a
regularization parameter, and Оі is a trade-off parameter between the rank
and sparsity terms. Notice from Proposition 3.3 that the choice of Оі depends on the values of Вө(в„Ұ(S вҲ— )) and Оҫ(T (LвҲ— )). While these quantities may

18

V. CHANDRASEKARAN, P. A. PARRILO AND A. S. WILLSKY

not be known a priori, we discuss a method to choose Оі numerically in our
experimental results (see Section 6). The following theorem shows that the
estimates (SМӮn , LМӮn ) provided by the convex program (1.2) are consistent for
a suitable choice of О»n . In addition to the appropriate identifiability conditions (as specified by Proposition 3.3), we also impose lower bounds on
the minimum magnitude nonzero entry Оё of the sparse conditional graphical
model matrix S вҲ— and on the minimum nonzero singular value Пғ of the lowrank matrix LвҲ— summarizing the effect of the latent variables. The theorem
is stated in terms of the quantities Оұ, ОІ, ОҪ, ПҲ, and we particularly emphasize
the dependence on Вө(в„Ұ(S вҲ— )) and Оҫ(T (LвҲ— )) because these control the comвҲ—
plexity of the underlying latent-variable graphical model given by K(O
H) .
ОҪОұ
A number of quantities play a role in our theorem: let D = max{1, 3ОІ(2вҲ’ОҪ) },
1
ОұОҪ
1
ОұОҪ
Оұ
), C2 = 48
C1 = ПҲ(1 + 6ОІ
Оұ + ПҲ2 , Csamp = 32(3вҲ’ОҪ)D min{ 4C1 , 256D(3вҲ’ОҪ)ПҲC 2 },
вҲҡ

, CS = max{( 6(2вҲ’ОҪ)
CО» = 48 2DПҲ(2вҲ’ОҪ)
+ 1)C22 ПҲ 2 D, C2 +
ОҪ
Оҫ(T )ОҪ

1

3ОұC22 (2вҲ’ОҪ)
16(3вҲ’ОҪ) } and CL =

C2 ОҪОұ
ОІ(2вҲ’ОҪ) .
вҲ—
Theorem 4.1. Let K(O
H) denote the concentration matrix of a Gausi }n
sian model. We have n samples {XO
i=1 of the p observed variables denoted
вҲ—
вҲ—
by O. Let в„Ұ = в„Ұ(S ) and T = T (L ) denote the tangent spaces at S вҲ— and at
LвҲ— with respect to the sparse and low-rank matrix varieties, respectively.
Assumptions: Suppose that the quantities Вө(в„Ұ) and Оҫ(T ) satisfy the assumption of Proposition 3.3 for identifiability, and Оі is chosen in the range
specified by Proposition 3.3. Further suppose that the following conditions
hold:
2

128ПҲ
(1) Let n вүҘ Оҫ(Tp )4 max{ C
, 2}, that is, we require that n & Оҫ(Tp )4 .
2
samp
q
q
вҲҡ
48 2DПҲ(2вҲ’ОҪ)
p
p
1
(2) Set О»n =
n , that is, we require that О»n вүҚ Оҫ(T )
n.
Оҫ(T )ОҪ
q
p
1
L О»n
(3) Let Пғ вүҘ C
,
that
is,
we
require
that
Пғ
&
2
3
n.
Оҫ(T )
Оҫ(T )
q
p
1
S О»n
(4) Let Оё вүҘ CВө(в„Ұ)
, that is, we require that Оё & Оҫ(T )Вө(в„Ұ)
n.

Conclusions: Then with probability greater than 1 вҲ’ 2 exp{вҲ’p} we have
algebraic correctness and estimation error given by:
(1) sign(SМӮn ) = sign(S вҲ— ) and rank(
LМӮn ) = q
rank(LвҲ— ); q
вҲҡ

2(3вҲ’ОҪ)DПҲ
(2) gОі (SМӮn вҲ’ S вҲ— , LМӮn вҲ’ LвҲ— ) вүӨ 512 ОҪОұОҫ(T
)

p
1
n . Оҫ(T )

p
n.

The proof of this theorem is given in Section 5. The theorem essentially
states that if the minimum nonzero singular value of the low-rank piece
LвҲ— and minimum nonzero entry of the sparse piece S вҲ— are bounded away
from zero, then the convex program (1.2) provides estimates that are both

LATENT VARIABLE MODEL SELECTION

19

algebraically correct and have bounded estimation error (in the в„“вҲһ and
spectral norms).
Notice that the condition on the minimum singular value of LвҲ— is more
stringent than the one on the minimum nonzero entry of S вҲ— . One role played
by these conditions is to ensure that the estimates (SМӮn , LМӮn ) do not have
smaller support size/rank than (S вҲ— , LвҲ— ). However, the minimum singular
value bound plays the additional role of bounding the curvature of the lowrank matrix variety around the point LвҲ— , which is the reason for this condition being more stringent. Notice also that the number of latent variables h
does not explicitly appear in the bounds in Theorem 4.1, which only depend
on p, Вө(в„Ұ(S вҲ— )), Оҫ(T (LвҲ— )). However, the dependence on h is implicit in the
dependence on Оҫ(T (LвҲ— )), and we discuss this point in greater detail in the
following section.
Finally we note that consistency holds in Theorem 4.1 for a range of values
)
ОҪОұ
, 2ОІ(2вҲ’ОҪ)Вө(в„Ұ)
]. In particular the assumptions on the sample
of Оі вҲҲ [ 3ОІ(2вҲ’ОҪ)Оҫ(T
ОҪОұ
complexity, the minimum nonzero singular value of LвҲ— , and the minimum
magnitude nonzero entry of S вҲ— are governed by the lower end of this range
for Оі. These assumptions can be weakened if we only require consistency
for a smaller range of values of Оі. The next result conveys this point with a
specific example.
Corollary 4.2. Consider the same setup and notation as in Theorem 4.1. Suppose that the quantities Вө(в„Ұ) and Оҫ(T ) satisfy the assumption
ОҪОұ
of Proposition 3.3 for identifiability, and that Оі = 2ОІ(2вҲ’ОҪ)Вө(в„Ұ)
(the upper
1
end of the range specified in Proposition 3.3), that is, Оі вүҚ Вө(в„Ұ) . Further
q
q
2
p
suppose that: (1) n & Вө(в„Ұ)4 p; (2) О»n вүҚ Вө(в„Ұ) np ; (3) Пғ & Вө(в„Ұ)
n ; (4)
Оҫ(T )
q
Оё & np . Then with probability greater than 1 вҲ’ 2 exp{вҲ’p} we have estimates (SМӮn , LМӮn ) that are algebraically
correct, and with the error bounded as
q

gОі (SМӮn вҲ’ S вҲ— , LМӮn вҲ’ LвҲ— ) . Вө(в„Ұ)

p
n.

The proof of this corollary3 is analogous to that of Theorem 4.1. We
emphasize that in practice it is often beneficial to have consistent estimates
for a range of values of Оі (as in Theorem 4.1). Specifically, the stability of
the sparsity pattern and rank of the estimates (SМӮn , LМӮn ) for a range of tradeoff parameters is useful in order to choose a suitable value of Оі, as prior
information about the quantities Вө(в„Ұ(S вҲ— )) and Оҫ(T (LвҲ— )) is not typically
available (see Section 6).
3
By making stronger assumptions on the Fisher information matrix I вҲ— , one can further remove
p the factor of Оҫ(T ) in the lower bound for Пғ. Specifically, the lower bound
Пғ & Вө(в„Ұ)3 np suffices for consistent estimation if the bounds defined by the quantities
ОұT , ОІT , ОҙT can be strengthened as described in the remarks at the end of Section 3.4.

20

V. CHANDRASEKARAN, P. A. PARRILO AND A. S. WILLSKY

We remark here that the identifiability conditions of Proposition 3.3 are
the main sufficient conditions required for Theorem 4.1 and Corollary 4.2 to
hold. It would be interesting to obtain necessary conditions as well for these
results, analogous to the necessity and sufficiency of the irrepresentability
conditions for the Lasso [32, 37].
4.2. Scaling regimes. Next we consider classes of latent-variable models
that satisfy the conditions of Theorem 4.1. Recall from Section 3.2 that
Вө(в„Ұ(S вҲ— )) вүӨ deg(S вҲ— ). Throughout this section, we consider latent-variable
models in whichqthe low-rank matrix LвҲ— is almost maximally incoherent, that
is, Оҫ(T (LвҲ— )) вҲј hp so the effect of marginalization over the latent variables
is diffuse across almost all the observed variables. We suppress the dependence on the quantities Оұ, ОІ, ОҪ, ПҲ defined in Section 3.4 in our scaling results,
and specifically focus on the trade-off between Оҫ(T (LвҲ— )) and Вө(в„Ұ(S вҲ— )) for
consistent estimation (we also suppress the dependence of these quantities
on n). Thus, based on Proposition 3.3 we study latent-variable models in
which
s
!
h
deg(S вҲ— ) = O(1).
Оҫ(T (LвҲ— ))Вө(в„Ұ(S вҲ— )) = O
p
As we describe next, there are nontrivial classes of latent-variable graphical
models in which this condition holds.
Bounded degree: The first class of latent-variable models that we consider
are those in which the conditional graphical model among the observed
вҲ— ) has constant degree:
variables (given by KO
deg(S вҲ— ) = O(1),

h вҲј p.

Such models can be estimated consistently from n вҲј p samples. Thus consistent latent-variable model selection is possible even when the number of
samples and the number of latent variables are on the same order as the
number of observed variables.
Polylogarithmic degree: The next class of models that we consider are
those in which the degree of the conditional graphical model of the observed
variables grows polylogarithmically with p:
p
deg(S вҲ— ) вҲј log(p)q ,
hвҲј
.
log(p)2q
Such latent-variable graphical models can be consistently estimated as long
as n вҲј p polylog(p).
For standard graphical model selection with no latent variables, в„“1 -regularized maximum-likelihood is shown to be consistent with n = O(log p) samples [26]. On the other hand, our results prove consistency in the setting
with latent variables when n = O(p) samples. It would be interesting to
study whether these rates are inherent to latent-variable model selection.

LATENT VARIABLE MODEL SELECTION

21

4.3. Rates for covariance matrix estimation. Theorem 4.1 gives conditions under which we can consistently estimate the sparse and low-rank parts
вҲ— . Here we state a corolthat compose the marginal concentration matrix KМғO
lary that gives rates for covariance matrix estimation, that is, the quality
of the estimate (SМӮn вҲ’ LМӮn )вҲ’1 with respect to the вҖңtrueвҖқ marginal covariance
matrix ОЈвҲ—O .
Corollary 4.3. Under the same conditions as in Theorem 4.1, we have
with probability greater than 1 вҲ’ 2 exp{вҲ’p} that


ОҪ
вҖ 
вҲ’1
вҲ—
.
gОі (A [(SМӮn вҲ’ LМӮn ) вҲ’ ОЈO ]) вүӨ О»n 1 +
6(2 вҲ’ ОҪ)
q
p
1
This corollary implies that k(SМӮn вҲ’ LМӮn )вҲ’1 вҲ’ ОЈвҲ—O k2 . Оҫ(T
n based on the
)
q
choice of О»n in Theorem 4.1, and that k(SМӮn вҲ’ LМӮn )вҲ’1 вҲ’ ОЈвҲ—O k2 . Вө(в„Ұ) np based
on the choice of О»n in Corollary 4.2.
5. Proofs.
5.1. Proofs of Section 3. Here we give proofs of the results stated in
Section 3.
Proof of Lemma 3.1. Since ПҒ(T1 , T2 ) < 1, the largest principal angle between T1 and T2 is strictly less than ПҖ2 . Consequently, the mapping
PT2 : T1 вҶ’ T2 restricted to T1 is bijective (as it is injective, and the spaces
T1 , T2 have the same dimension). Consider the maximum and minimum gains
of PT2 restricted to T1 ; for any M вҲҲ T1 , kM k2 = 1:
kPT2 (M )k2 = kM + [PT2 вҲ’ PT1 ](M )k2 вҲҲ [1 вҲ’ ПҒ(T1 , T2 ), 1 + ПҒ(T1 , T2 )].
Therefore, we can rewrite Оҫ(T2 ) as follows:
Оҫ(T2 ) =
вүӨ
вүӨ

max

kN kвҲһ =

N вҲҲT2 ,kN k2 вүӨ1

max

kPT2 (N )kвҲһ

N вҲҲT2 ,kN k2 вүӨ1

max

kPT2 (N )kвҲһ

max

[kN kвҲһ + k[PT1 вҲ’ PT2 ](N )kвҲһ ]

N вҲҲT1 ,kN k2 вүӨ1/(1вҲ’ПҒ(T1 ,T2 ))
N вҲҲT1 ,kN k2 вүӨ1/(1вҲ’ПҒ(T1 ,T2 ))

i
h
1
Оҫ(T1 ) +
max
k[PT1 вҲ’ PT2 ](N )kвҲһ
1 вҲ’ ПҒ(T1 , T2 )
N вҲҲT1 ,kN k2 вүӨ1
i
h
1
Оҫ(T1 ) + max k[PT1 вҲ’ PT2 ](N )k2
вүӨ
1 вҲ’ ПҒ(T1 , T2 )
kN k2 вүӨ1
вүӨ

1
[Оҫ(T1 ) + ПҒ(T1 , T2 )].
1 вҲ’ ПҒ(T1 , T2 )
This concludes the proof of the lemma. 
вүӨ

22

V. CHANDRASEKARAN, P. A. PARRILO AND A. S. WILLSKY

Proof of Lemma 3.2. We have that AвҖ  A(S, L) = (S + L, S + L);
therefore, PY AвҖ  APY (S, L) = (S + Pв„Ұ (L), PT (S) + L). We need to bound
kS + Pв„Ұ (L)kвҲһ and kPT (S) + Lk2 . First, we have
kS + Pв„Ұ (L)kвҲһ вҲҲ [kSkвҲһ вҲ’ kPв„Ұ (L)kвҲһ , kSkвҲһ + kPв„Ұ (L)kвҲһ ]
вҠҶ [kSkвҲһ вҲ’ kLkвҲһ , kSkвҲһ + kLkвҲһ ]
вҠҶ [Оі вҲ’ Оҫ(T ), Оі + Оҫ(T )].
Similarly, one can check that
kPT (S) + Lk2 вҲҲ [вҲ’kPT (S)k2 + kLk2 , kPT (S)k2 + kLk2 ]
вҠҶ [1 вҲ’ 2kSk2 , 1 + 2kSk2 ]
вҠҶ [1 вҲ’ 2ОіВө(в„Ұ), 1 + 2ОіВө(в„Ұ)].
These two bounds give us the desired result. 
Proof of Proposition 3.3. Before proving the two parts of this
proposition we make a simple observation about Оҫ(T вҖІ ) using the condition
)
that ПҒ(T, T вҖІ ) вүӨ Оҫ(T
2 by applying Lemma 3.1:
Оҫ(T вҖІ ) вүӨ

3Оҫ(T )/2
Оҫ(T ) + ПҒ(T, T вҖІ )
вүӨ
вүӨ 3Оҫ(T ).
вҖІ
1 вҲ’ ПҒ(T, T )
1 вҲ’ Оҫ(T )/2

Here we used the property that Оҫ(T ) вүӨ 1 in obtaining the final inequality.
)
ОҪОұ
Consequently, noting that Оі вҲҲ [ 3ОІ(2вҲ’ОҪ)Оҫ(T
, 2ОІ(2вҲ’ОҪ)Вө(в„Ұ)
] implies that
ОҪОұ


ОҪОұ
Оҫ(T вҖІ )
(5.1)
, 2Вө(в„Ұ)Оі вүӨ
.
ПҮ(в„Ұ, T вҖІ , Оі) = max
Оі
ОІ(2 вҲ’ ОҪ)
Part 1: The proof of this step proceeds in a similar manner to that of
Lemma 3.2. First we have for S вҲҲ в„Ұ, L вҲҲ T вҖІ with kSkвҲһ = Оі, kLk2 = 1:
kPв„Ұ I вҲ— (S + L)kвҲһ вүҘ kPв„Ұ I вҲ— SkвҲһ вҲ’ kPв„Ұ I вҲ— LkвҲһ вүҘ ОұОі вҲ’ kI вҲ— LkвҲһ вүҘ ОұОі вҲ’ ОІОҫ(T вҖІ ).
Next, under the same conditions on S, L,
kPT вҖІ I вҲ— (S + L)k2 вүҘ kPT вҖІ I вҲ— Lk2 вҲ’ kPT вҖІ I вҲ— Sk2 вүҘ Оұ вҲ’ 2kI вҲ— Sk2 вүҘ Оұ вҲ’ 2ОІВө(в„Ұ)Оі.
Combining these last two bounds with (5.1), we conclude that
min

(S,L)вҲҲY,kSkвҲһ =Оі,kLk2 =1

gОі (PY AвҖ  I вҲ— APY (S, L))

Оҫ(T вҖІ )
, 2Вө(в„Ұ)Оі
вүҘ Оұ вҲ’ ОІ max
Оі




вүҘОұвҲ’

ОҪОұ
2Оұ(1 вҲ’ ОҪ) Оұ
=
вүҘ ,
2вҲ’ОҪ
2вҲ’ОҪ
2

where the final inequality follows from the assumption that ОҪ вҲҲ (0, 21 ].

LATENT VARIABLE MODEL SELECTION

23

Part 2: Note that for S вҲҲ в„Ұ, L вҲҲ T вҖІ with kSkвҲһ вүӨ Оі, kLk2 вүӨ 1,

kPв„ҰвҠҘ I вҲ— (S + L)kвҲһ вүӨ kPв„ҰвҠҘ I вҲ— SkвҲһ + kPв„ҰвҠҘ I вҲ— LkвҲһ вүӨ ОҙОі + ОІОҫ(T вҖІ ).

Similarly,
kPT вҖІвҠҘ I вҲ— (S + L)k2 вүӨ kPT вҖІвҠҘ I вҲ— Sk2 + kPT вҖІвҠҘ I вҲ— Lk2 вүӨ ОІОіВө(в„Ұ) + Оҙ.
Combining these last two bounds with the bounds from the first part, we
have that
kPY вҠҘ AвҖ  I вҲ— APY (PY AвҖ  I вҲ— APY )вҲ’1 kgОі вҶ’gОі
вүӨ

Оҙ + ОІ max{Оҫ(T вҖІ )/Оі, 2Вө(в„Ұ)Оі}
Оҙ + ОҪОұ/(2 вҲ’ ОҪ)
вүӨ
Оұ вҲ’ ОІ max{Оҫ(T вҖІ )/Оі, 2Вө(в„Ұ)Оі} Оұ вҲ’ ОҪОұ/(2 вҲ’ ОҪ)

вүӨ

(1 вҲ’ 2ОҪ)Оұ + ОҪОұ/(2 вҲ’ ОҪ)
= 1 вҲ’ ОҪ.
Оұ вҲ’ ОҪОұ/(2 вҲ’ ОҪ)

This concludes the proof of the proposition. 
5.2. Proof strategy for Theorem 4.1. Standard results from convex analysis [28] state that (SМӮn , LМӮn ) is a minimum of the convex program (1.2) if the
zero matrix belongs to the subdifferential of the objective function evaluated
at (SМӮn , LМӮn ) [in addition to (SМӮn , LМӮn ) satisfying the constraints]. Elements of
the subdifferentials with respect to the в„“1 norm and the nuclear norm at a
matrix M have the key property that they decompose with respect to the
tangent spaces в„Ұ(M ) and T (M ) [34]. This decomposition property plays a
critical role in our analysis. In particular it states that the optimality conditions consist of two parts, one part corresponding to the tangent spaces в„Ұ
and T and another corresponding to the normal spaces в„ҰвҠҘ and T вҠҘ .
Our analysis proceeds by constructing a primal-dual pair of variables that
certify optimality with respect to (1.2). Consider the optimization problem (1.2) with the additional (nonconvex) constraints that the variable S
belongs to the algebraic variety of sparse matrices and that the variable L
belongs to the algebraic variety of low-rank matrices. While this new optimization problem is nonconvex, it has a very interesting property. At a
globally optimal solution (and indeed at any locally optimal solution) (SМғ, LМғ)
such that SМғ and LМғ are smooth points of the algebraic varieties of sparse and
low-rank matrices, the first-order optimality conditions state that the Lagrange multipliers corresponding to the additional variety constraints must
lie in the normal spaces в„Ұ(SМғ)вҠҘ and T (LМғ)вҠҘ . This basic observation, combined with the decomposition property of the subdifferentials of the в„“1 and
nuclear norms, suggests the following high-level proof strategy: considering
the solution (SМғ, LМғ) of the variety-constrained problem, we show under suitable conditions that the second part of the subgradient optimality conditions
of (1.2) (without any variety constraints) corresponding to components in

24

V. CHANDRASEKARAN, P. A. PARRILO AND A. S. WILLSKY

the normal spaces в„Ұ(SМғ)вҠҘ and T (LМғ)вҠҘ is also satisfied by (SМғ, LМғ). Thus, we
show that (SМғ, LМғ) satisfies the optimality conditions of the original convex
program (1.2). Consequently (SМғ, LМғ) is also the optimum of the convex program (1.2). As this estimate is obtained as the solution to the problem
with the variety constraints, the algebraic correctness of (SМғ, LМғ) can be directly concluded. We emphasize here that the variety-constrained optimization problem is used solely as an analysis tool in order to prove consistency
of the estimates provided by the convex program (1.2). The key technical
complication is that the tangent spaces at LМғ and LвҲ— are in general different.
We bound the twisting between these tangent spaces by using the fact that
the minimum nonzero singular value of LвҲ— is bounded away from zero (as
assumed in Theorem 4.1; see also the supplement [6]).
5.3. Results proved in supplement. In this section we give the statements
of some results that are proved in a separate supplement [6]. These results
are critical to the proof of our main theorem, but they deal mainly with nonstatistical aspects such as the curvature of the algebraic variety of low-rank
matrices. Recall that в„Ұ = в„Ұ(S вҲ— ) and T = T (LвҲ— ). We also refer frequently to
the constants defined in Theorem 4.1.
As the gradient of the log-determinant function is given by a matrix inverse, a key step in analyzing the properties of the convex program (1.2) is
to show that the change in the inverse of a matrix due to small perturbations
is well-approximated by the first-order term in the Taylor series expansion.
Consider the Taylor series of the inverse of a matrix:
(M + вҲҶ)вҲ’1 = M вҲ’1 вҲ’ M вҲ’1 вҲҶM вҲ’1 + RM вҲ’1 (вҲҶ),
where
RM вҲ’1 (вҲҶ) = M

вҲ’1

"вҲһ
X
k=2

(вҲ’вҲҶM

вҲ’1 k

)

#

.

This infinite sum converges for вҲҶ sufficiently small. The following proposition provides a bound on the second-order term specialized to our setting:
Proposition 5.1. Suppose that Оі is in the range given by Proposition 3.3. Further suppose вҲҶS вҲҲ в„Ұ, and let gОі (вҲҶS , вҲҶL ) вүӨ 2C1 1 . Then we have
that
2DПҲC12 gОі (вҲҶS , вҲҶL )2
.
gОі (AвҖ  RОЈвҲ—O (A(вҲҶS , вҲҶL ))) вүӨ
Оҫ(T )
Next we analyze the following convex program subject to certain additional constraints:
(SМӮв„Ұ , LМӮTМғ ) = arg min tr[(S вҲ’ L)ОЈnO ] вҲ’ log det(S вҲ’ L) + О»n [ОіkSk1 + kLkвҲ— ]
(5.2)

S,L

s.t. S вҲ’ L вү» 0, S вҲҲ в„Ұ, L вҲҲ TМғ ,

LATENT VARIABLE MODEL SELECTION

25

for some subspace TМғ . Comparing (5.2) with the convex program (1.2), we
also do not constrain the variable L to be positive semidefinite in (5.2) for
ease of proof of the next result (see the supplement [6] for more details; recall
that the nuclear norm of a positive-semidefinite matrix is equal to its trace).
We show that if TМғ is any tangent space to the low-rank matrix variety such
)
вҲ—
вҲ—
that ПҒ(T, TМғ ) вүӨ Оҫ(T
2 , then we can bound the error (вҲҶS , вҲҶL ) = (SМӮв„Ұ вҲ’ S , L вҲ’
LМӮTМғ ). Let CTМғ = PTМғ вҠҘ (LвҲ— ) denote the normal component of the true low-rank
matrix at TМғ , and let En = ОЈnO вҲ’ ОЈвҲ—O denote the difference between the true
marginal covariance and the sample covariance. The proof of the following
result uses BrouwerвҖҷs fixed-point theorem [25], and is inspired by the proof of
a similar result in [26] for standard sparse graphical model recovery without
latent variables.
Proposition 5.2. Let the error (вҲҶS , вҲҶL ) in the solution of the convex
)
program (5.2) [with TМғ such that ПҒ(TМғ , T ) вүӨ Оҫ(T
2 ] be as defined above, and
define


8
вҖ 
вҖ  вҲ—
[gОі (A En ) + gОі (A I CTМғ ) + О»n ], kCT вҖІ k2 .
r = max
Оұ
ОұОҫ(T )
If r вүӨ min{ 4C1 1 , 64DПҲC
2 } for Оі as in Proposition 3.3, then gОі (вҲҶS , вҲҶL ) вүӨ 2r.
1

Finally we give a proposition that summarizes the algebraic component
of our proof.
Proposition 5.3. Assume that Оі is in the range specified by ProposiО»n ОҪ
1
L О»n
S О»n
tion 3.3, Пғ вүҘ C
, gОі (AвҖ  En ) вүӨ 6(2вҲ’ОҪ)
, and that О»n вүӨ 3Оұ(2вҲ’ОҪ)
, Оё вүҘ CВө(в„Ұ)
16(3вҲ’ОҪ) min{ 4C1 ,
Оҫ(T )2
ОұОҫ(T )
}. Then there exists a T вҖІ and a corresponding unique solution (SМӮв„Ұ , LМӮT вҖІ )
64DПҲC12
of (5.2) with TМғ = T вҖІ with the following properties:

(1) sign(SМӮв„Ұ ) = sign(S вҲ— ) and rank(LМӮT вҖІ ) = rank(LвҲ— ), with LМӮT вҖІ  0. Further
)
T (LМӮT вҖІ ) = T вҖІ and ПҒ(T, T вҖІ ) вүӨ Оҫ(T
4 .
О»n ОҪ
, and that
(2) Letting CT вҖІ = PT вҖІвҠҘ (LвҲ— ) we have that gОі (AвҖ  I вҲ— CT вҖІ ) вүӨ 6(2вҲ’ОҪ)
n
kCT вҖІ k2 вүӨ 16(3вҲ’ОҪ)О»
3Оұ(2вҲ’ОҪ) .

О»n ОҪ
Further, if gОі (AвҖ  RОЈвҲ—O (A(SМӮв„Ұ вҲ’ S вҲ— , LвҲ— вҲ’ LМӮT вҖІ ))) вүӨ 6(2вҲ’ОҪ)
, then the tangent
вҖІ
space constraints S вҲҲ в„Ұ, L вҲҲ T are inactive in (5.2). Consequently the unique
solution of (1.2) is (SМӮn , LМӮn ) = (SМӮв„Ұ , LМӮT вҖІ ).

5.4. Probabilistic analysis. The results given thus far in this section have
been completely deterministic in nature. Here we present the probabilistic
component of our proof by studying the rate at which the sample covariance
matrix ОЈnO converges to the true covariance matrix ОЈвҲ—O in spectral norm. This

26

V. CHANDRASEKARAN, P. A. PARRILO AND A. S. WILLSKY

result is well known and follows directly from Theorem II.13 in [8]; we mainly
discuss it here for completeness and also to show explicitly the dependence
on ПҲ = kОЈвҲ—O k2 defined in (3.4). See the supplement [6] for a proof.
Lemma 5.4. Let ПҲ = kОЈвҲ—O k2 . Given any Оҙ > 0 with Оҙ вүӨ 8ПҲ, let the num2
ber of samples n be such that n вүҘ 64pПҲ
. Then we have that
Оҙ2


nОҙ2
n
вҲ—
Pr[kОЈO вҲ’ ОЈO k2 вүҘ Оҙ] вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’
.
128ПҲ 2
The following corollary relates the number of samples required for an error
bound to hold with probability 1 вҲ’ 2 exp{вҲ’p}.
Corollary 5.5.

Let ОЈnO be the sample
q covariance formed from n sam-

ples of the observed variables. Set Оҙn =

128pПҲ2
. If n вүҘ 2p, then
n

Pr[kОЈnO вҲ’ ОЈвҲ—O k2 вүӨ Оҙn ] вүҘ 1 вҲ’ 2 exp{вҲ’p}.

Proof. Note that n вүҘ 2p implies that Оҙn вүӨ 8ПҲ, and apply Lemma 5.4. 
5.5. Proof of Theorem 4.1 and Corollary 4.3. We first combine the ren
вҲ—
sults
q obtained thus far to prove Theorem 4.1. Set En = ОЈO вҲ’ ОЈO , set Оҙn =
128pПҲ2
n (2вҲ’ОҪ)
, and then set О»n = 6DОҙОҫ(T
. This setting of О»n is equivalent to
n
)ОҪ
the specification in the statement of Theorem 4.1.
Proof of Theorem 4.1. We mainly need to show that the various sufficient conditions of Proposition 5.3 are satisfied. We condition on the event
that kEn k2 вүӨ Оҙn , which holds with probability greater than 1 вҲ’ 2 exp{вҲ’p}
from Corollary 5.5 as n вүҘ 2p by assumption. Based on the bound on n, we
also have that



ОұОҪ
1
ОұОҪ
2
Оҙn вүӨ Оҫ(T )
.
min
,
32(3 вҲ’ ОҪ)D
4C1 256D(3 вҲ’ ОҪ)ПҲC12

In particular, these bounds imply that

(5.3)



ОұОҫ(T )ОҪ
1
ОұОҫ(T )
;
Оҙn вүӨ
min
,
32(3 вҲ’ ОҪ)D
4C1 64DПҲC12
Оҙn вүӨ

Оұ2 Оҫ(T )2 ОҪ 2
.
8192ПҲC12 (3 вҲ’ ОҪ)2 D 2

Both these weaker bounds are used later.
Based on the assumptions of Theorem 4.1, the requirements of Proposition 5.3 on Пғ and Оё are satisfied. Next we verify the bounds on О»n and
gОі (AвҖ  En ). Based on the setting of О»n above and the bound on Оҙn from (5.3),

LATENT VARIABLE MODEL SELECTION

27

we have that


1
ОұОҫ(T )
6D(2 вҲ’ ОҪ)Оҙn 3Оұ(2 вҲ’ ОҪ)
вүӨ
min
,
.
О»n =
Оҫ(T )ОҪ
16(3 вҲ’ ОҪ)
4C1 64DПҲC12
n (2вҲ’ОҪ)
Next we combine the facts that О»n = 6DОҙОҫ(T
and that kEn k2 вүӨ Оҙn to
)ОҪ
conclude that
DОҙn
О»n ОҪ
gОі (AвҖ  En ) вүӨ
(5.4)
=
.
Оҫ(T ) 6(2 вҲ’ ОҪ)

Thus, we have from Proposition 5.3 that there exists a T вҖІ and corresponding solution (SМӮв„Ұ , LМӮT вҖІ ) of (5.2) with the prescribed properties. Next we apply
Proposition 5.2 with TМғ = T вҖІ to bound the error (SМӮв„Ұ вҲ’ S вҲ— , LвҲ— вҲ’ LМӮT вҖІ ). Noting
)
that ПҒ(T, T вҖІ ) вүӨ Оҫ(T
4 , we have that


ОҪ
8
8
вҖ 
вҖ  вҲ—
[gОі (A En ) + gОі (A I CT вҖІ ) + О»n ] вүӨ
+ 1 О»n
Оұ
Оұ 3(2 вҲ’ ОҪ)
(5.5)
(5.6)
(5.7)

=

16(3 вҲ’ ОҪ)О»n
3Оұ(2 вҲ’ ОҪ)

32(3 вҲ’ ОҪ)D
Оҙn
ОұОҫ(T )ОҪ


1
ОұОҫ(T )
.
вүӨ min
,
4C1 64DПҲC12
=

О»n ОҪ
In the first inequality we used the fact that gОі (AвҖ  En ) вүӨ 6(2вҲ’ОҪ)
(from above)
вҖ 
вҲ—
and that gОі (A I CT вҖІ ) is similarly bounded (from Proposition 5.3). In the
n (2вҲ’ОҪ)
second equality we used the relation О»n = 6DОҙОҫ(T
. In the final inequality
)ОҪ
we used the bound on Оҙn from (5.3). This satisfies one of the requirements of
Proposition 5.2. The second requirement of Proposition 5.2 on kCT вҖІ k2 is also
n
similarly satisfied as we have that kCT вҖІ k2 вүӨ 16(3вҲ’ОҪ)О»
3Оұ(2вҲ’ОҪ) from Proposition 5.3,
and we use the same sequence of inequalities as above. Thus we conclude
from Proposition 5.2 and from (5.5) that
r
1
p
32(3 вҲ’ ОҪ)О»n
вҲ—
вҲ—
(5.8)
.
.
gОі (SМӮв„Ұ вҲ’ S , L вҲ’ LМӮT вҖІ ) вүӨ
3Оұ(2 вҲ’ ОҪ)
Оҫ(T ) n

Here the last inequality follows from the bound on О»n .
If we show that (SМӮn , LМӮn ) = (SМӮв„Ұ , LМӮT вҖІ ), we can conclude the proof of Theorem 4.1 since algebraic correctness of (SМӮв„Ұ , LМӮT вҖІ ) holds from Proposition 5.3
and the estimation error bound follows from (5.8). In order to complete this
final step, we again revert to Proposition 5.3 and prove the requisite bound
on gОі (AвҖ  RОЈвҲ—O (A(SМӮв„Ұ вҲ’ S вҲ— , LвҲ— вҲ’ LМӮT вҖІ ))).

28

V. CHANDRASEKARAN, P. A. PARRILO AND A. S. WILLSKY

Since the bound (5.8) combined with the inequality (5.7) satisfies the
condition of Proposition 5.1 [i.e., we have that gОі (SМӮв„Ұ вҲ’ S вҲ— , LвҲ— вҲ’ LМӮT вҖІ ) вүӨ 2C1 1 ]:
2DПҲC12
gОі (SМӮв„Ұ вҲ’ S вҲ— , LвҲ— вҲ’ LМӮT вҖІ )2
Оҫ(T )


2DПҲC12 64(3 вҲ’ ОҪ)D 2 2
вүӨ
Оҙn
Оҫ(T )
ОұОҫ(T )ОҪ


DОҙn
8192ПҲC12 (3 вҲ’ ОҪ)2 D 2
Оҙ
=
n
Оұ2 Оҫ(T )2 ОҪ 2
Оҫ(T )

gОі (AвҖ  RОЈвҲ—O (A(SМӮв„Ұ вҲ’ S вҲ— , LвҲ— вҲ’ LМӮT вҖІ ))) вүӨ

вүӨ

DОҙn
Оҫ(T )

О»n ОҪ
.
6(2 вҲ’ ОҪ)
In the second inequality we used (5.6) and (5.8), in the final inequality we
used the bound (5.3) on Оҙn , and in the final equality we used the relation
n (2вҲ’ОҪ)
О»n = 6DОҙОҫ(T
. 
)ОҪ
=

Proof of Corollary 4.3. Based on the optimality conditions of the
modified convex program (5.2), we have that
gОі (AвҖ  [(SМӮn вҲ’ LМӮn )вҲ’1 вҲ’ ОЈnO ]) вүӨ О»n .
Combining this with the bound (5.4) yields the desired result. 
6. Simulation results. In this section we give experimental demonstration of the consistency of our estimator (1.2) on synthetic examples, and its
effectiveness in modeling real-world stock return data. Our choices of О»n and
Оі are
q guided by Theorem 4.1. Specifically, we choose О»n to be proportional
to np . For Оі we observe that the support/sign-pattern and the rank of the
solution (SМӮn , LМӮn ) are the same for a range of values of Оі. Therefore one could
solve the convex program (1.2) for several values of Оі, and choose a solution
in a suitable range in which the sign-pattern and rank of the solution are
stable (see [7] for details). In practical problems with real-world data these
parameters may be chosen via cross-validation (it would be of interest to consider methods such as those developed in [24]). For small problem instances
we solve the convex program (1.2) using a combination of YALMIP [21] and
SDPT3 [31]. For larger problem instances we use the special-purpose solver
LogdetPPA [33] developed for log-determinant semidefinite programs.

6.1. Synthetic data. In the first set of experiments we consider a setting in which we have access to samples of the observed variables of a
latent-variable graphical model. We consider several latent-variable Gaus-

LATENT VARIABLE MODEL SELECTION

29

Fig. 1. Synthetic data: plot showing probability of algebraically correct estimation. The
three models studied are (a) 36-node conditional graphical model given by a cycle with h = 2
latent variables, (b) 36-node conditional graphical model given by a cycle with h = 3 latent
variables and (c) 36-node conditional graphical model given by a 6 Г— 6 grid with h = 1
latent variable. For each plotted point, the probability of algebraically correct estimation is
obtained over 50 random trials.

sian graphical models. The first model consists of p = 36 observed variables
and h = 2 latent variables. The conditional graphical model structure of the
observed variables is a cycle with the edge partial correlation coefficients
equal to 0.25; thus, this conditional model is specified by a sparse graphical
model with degree 2. The second model is the same as the first one, but with
h = 3 latent variables. The third model consists of h = 1 latent variable, and
the conditional graphical model structure of the observed variables is given
by a 6 Г— 6 nearest-neighbor grid (i.e., p = 36 and degree 4) with the partial correlation coefficients of the edges equal to 0.15. In all three of these
models each latent variable is connected to a random subset of 80% of the
observed variables (and the partial correlation coefficients corresponding to
these edges are also random). Therefore the effect of the latent variables
is вҖңspread outвҖқ over most of the observed variables, that is, the low-rank
matrix summarizing the effect of the latent variables is incoherent.
For each model we generate n samples of the observed variables, and use
the resulting sample covariance ОЈnO as input to our convex program (1.2).
Figure 1 shows the probability of obtaining algebraically correct estimates
as a function of n. This probability is evaluated over 50 experiments for each
value of n. In all of these cases standard graphical model selection applied
directly to the observed variables is not useful as the marginal concentration
matrix of the observed variables is not well-approximated by a sparse matrix. These experiments agree with our theoretical results that the convex

30

V. CHANDRASEKARAN, P. A. PARRILO AND A. S. WILLSKY

Fig. 2. Stock returns: the figure on the left shows the sparsity pattern (black denotes an
edge, and white denotes no edge) of the concentration matrix of the conditional graphical
model (135 edges) of the stock returns, conditioned on five latent variables, in a latentвҖ“
variable graphical model (total number of parameters equals 639). This model is learned
using (1.2), and the KL divergence with respect to a Gaussian distribution specified by the
sample covariance is 17.7. The figure on the right shows the concentration matrix of the
graphical model (646 edges) of the stock returns, learned using standard sparse graphical
model selection based on solving an в„“1 -regularized maximum-likelihood program (total number of parameters equals 730). The KL divergence between this distribution and a Gaussian
distribution specified by the sample covariance is 44.4.

program (1.2) is an algebraically consistent estimator of a latent-variable
model given (sufficiently many) samples of only the observed variables.
6.2. Stock return data. In the next experiment we model the statistical
structure of monthly stock returns of 84 companies in the S&P 100 index
from 1990 to 2007; we disregard 16 companies that were listed after 1990.
The number of samples n is equal to 216. We compute the sample covariance
based on these returns and use this as input to (1.2).
The model learned using (1.2) for suitable values of О»n , Оі consists of h = 5
latent variables, and the conditional graphical model structure of the stock
returns conditioned on these latent components consists of 135 edges. Therefore the number of parameters in the model is 84 + 135 + (5 Г— 84) = 639.
The resulting KL divergence between the distribution specified by this model
and a Gaussian distribution specified by the sample covariance is 17.7. Figure 2 (left) shows the conditional graphical model structure. The strongest
edges in this conditional graphical model, as measured by partial correlation, are between Baker HughesвҖ“Schlumberger, A.T.&T.вҖ“Verizon, Merrill LynchвҖ“Morgan Stanley, HalliburtonвҖ“Baker Hughes, IntelвҖ“Texas Instruments, AppleвҖ“Dell, and MicrosoftвҖ“Dell. It is of interest to note that in the
Standard Industrial Classification4 system for grouping these companies,
several of these pairs are in different classes. As mentioned in Section 2.1,
our method estimates a low-rank matrix that summarizes the effect of the
latent variables; in order to factorize this low-rank matrix, for example, into
sparse factors, one could use methods such as those described in [35].
4

See the U.S. SEC website at http://www.sec.gov/info/edgar/siccodes.htm.

LATENT VARIABLE MODEL SELECTION

31

We compare these results to those obtained using a sparse graphical model
learned using в„“1 -regularized maximum-likelihood (see, e.g., [26]), without
introducing any latent variables. Figure 2 (right) shows this graphical model
structure. The number of edges in this model is 646 (the total number of
parameters is equal to 646 + 84 = 730), and the resulting KL divergence
between this distribution and a Gaussian distribution specified by the sample
covariance is 44.4.
These results suggest that a latent-variable graphical model is better
suited than a standard sparse graphical model for modeling stock returns.
This is likely due to the presence of global, long-range correlations in stock
return data that are better modeled via latent variables.
7. Discussion. We have studied the problem of modeling the statistical
structure of a collection of random variables as a sparse graphical model conditioned on a few additional latent components. As a first contribution we
described conditions under which such latent-variable graphical models are
identifiable given samples of only the observed variables. We also proposed
a convex program based on в„“1 and nuclear norm regularized maximumlikelihood for latent-variable graphical model selection. Given samples of
the observed variables of a latent-variable Gaussian model, we proved that
this convex program provides consistent estimates of the number of latent
components as well as the conditional graphical model structure among the
observed variables conditioned on the latent components. Our analysis holds
in the high-dimensional regime in which the number of observed/latent variables are allowed to grow with the number of samples of the observed variables. These theoretical predictions are verified via a set of experiments on
synthetic data. We also demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in
modeling real-world stock return data.
Several questions arise that are worthy of further investigation. While (1.2)
can be solved in polynomial time using off-the-shelf solvers, it is preferable
to develop more efficient special-purpose solvers to scale to massive datasets
by taking advantage of the structure of (1.2). It is also of interest to develop
statistically consistent convex optimization methods for latent-variable modeling with non-Gaussian variables, for example, for categorical data.
Acknowledgments. We would like to thank James Saunderson and Myung
Jin Choi for helpful discussions, and Kim-Chuan Toh for kindly providing
us specialized code to solve larger instances of our convex program.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplement to вҖңLatent variable graphical model selection via convex optimizationвҖқ (DOI: 10.1214/11-AOS949SUPP; .pdf). Due to space constraints,
we have moved some technical proofs to a supplementary document [6].

32

V. CHANDRASEKARAN, P. A. PARRILO AND A. S. WILLSKY

REFERENCES
[1] Bickel, P. J. and Levina, E. (2008). Regularized estimation of large covariance
matrices. Ann. Statist. 36 199вҖ“227. MR2387969
[2] Bickel, P. J. and Levina, E. (2008). Covariance regularization by thresholding.
Ann. Statist. 36 2577вҖ“2604. MR2485008
[3] CandeМҖs, E. J., Li, X., Ma, Y. and Wright, J. (2011). Robust principal component
analysis? J. ACM 58 Art. 11, 37. MR2811000
[4] CandeМҖs, E. J. and Recht, B. (2009). Exact matrix completion via convex optimization. Found. Comput. Math. 9 717вҖ“772. MR2565240
[5] CandeМҖs, E. J., Romberg, J. and Tao, T. (2006). Robust uncertainty principles:
Exact signal reconstruction from highly incomplete frequency information. IEEE
Trans. Inform. Theory 52 489вҖ“509. MR2236170
[6] Chandrasekaran, V., Parrilo, P. A. and Willsky, A. S. (2011). Supplement to вҖңLatent variable graphical model selection via convex optimization.вҖқ
DOI:10.1214/11-AOS949SUPP.
[7] Chandrasekaran, V., Sanghavi, S., Parrilo, P. A. and Willsky, A. S. (2011).
Rank-sparsity incoherence for matrix decomposition. SIAM J. Optim. 21 572вҖ“
596. MR2817479
[8] Davidson, K. R. and Szarek, S. J. (2001). Local operator theory, random matrices
and Banach spaces. In Handbook of the Geometry of Banach Spaces, Vol. I 317вҖ“
366. North-Holland, Amsterdam. MR1863696
[9] Dempster, A. P., Laird, N. M. and Rubin, D. B. (1977). Maximum likelihood from
incomplete data via the EM algorithm. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 39 1вҖ“38.
[10] Donoho, D. L. (2006). For most large underdetermined systems of linear equations
the minimal l1 -norm solution is also the sparsest solution. Comm. Pure Appl.
Math. 59 797вҖ“829. MR2217606
[11] Donoho, D. L. (2006). Compressed sensing. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory 52 1289вҖ“
1306. MR2241189
[12] El Karoui, N. (2008). Operator norm consistent estimation of large-dimensional
sparse covariance matrices. Ann. Statist. 36 2717вҖ“2756. MR2485011
[13] Elidan, G., Nachman, I. and Friedman, N. (2007). вҖңIdeal parentвҖқ structure learning for continuous variable Bayesian networks. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 8 1799вҖ“1833.
MR2353820
[14] Fan, J., Fan, Y. and Lv, J. (2008). High dimensional covariance matrix estimation
using a factor model. J. Econometrics 147 186вҖ“197. MR2472991
[15] Fazel, M. (2002). Matrix rank minimization with applications. Ph.D. thesis, Dept.
Elec. Eng., Stanford Univ.
[16] Horn, R. A. and Johnson, C. R. (1990). Matrix Analysis. Cambridge Univ. Press,
Cambridge. MR1084815
[17] Johnstone, I. M. (2001). On the distribution of the largest eigenvalue in principal
components analysis. Ann. Statist. 29 295вҖ“327. MR1863961
[18] Lam, C. and Fan, J. (2009). Sparsistency and rates of convergence in large covariance
matrix estimation. Ann. Statist. 37 4254вҖ“4278. MR2572459
[19] Lauritzen, S. L. (1996). Graphical Models. Oxford Statistical Science Series 17.
Oxford Univ. Press, New York. MR1419991
[20] Ledoit, O. and Wolf, M. (2004). A well-conditioned estimator for large-dimensional
covariance matrices. J. Multivariate Anal. 88 365вҖ“411. MR2026339
[21] LoМҲfberg, J. (2004). YALMIP: A toolbox for modeling and optimization in
MATLAB. In Proceedings of the CACSD Conference, Taiwan. Available at
http://control.ee.ethz.ch/~ joloef/yalmip.php.

LATENT VARIABLE MODEL SELECTION

33

[22] MarcМҢenko, V. A. and Pastur, L. A. (1967). Distribution of eigenvalues in certain
sets of random matrices. Mat. Sb. 72 507вҖ“536. MR0208649
[23] Meinshausen, N. and BuМҲhlmann, P. (2006). High-dimensional graphs and variable
selection with the lasso. Ann. Statist. 34 1436вҖ“1462. MR2278363
[24] Meinshausen, N. and BuМҲhlmann, P. (2010). Stability selection. J. R. Stat. Soc.
Ser. B Stat. Methodol. 72 417вҖ“473. MR2758523
[25] Ortega, J. M. and Rheinboldt, W. C. (1970). Iterative Solution of Nonlinear
Equations in Several Variables. Academic Press, New York. MR0273810
[26] Ravikumar, P., Wainwright, M. J., Raskutti, G. and Yu, B. (2011). Highdimensional covariance estimation by minimizing в„“1 -penalized log-determinant
divergence. Electron. J. Stat. 4 935вҖ“980.
[27] Recht, B., Fazel, M. and Parrilo, P. A. (2010). Guaranteed minimum-rank solutions of linear matrix equations via nuclear norm minimization. SIAM Rev. 52
471вҖ“501. MR2680543
[28] Rockafellar, R. T. (1996). Convex Analysis. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton,
NJ. MR1451876
[29] Rothman, A. J., Bickel, P. J., Levina, E. and Zhu, J. (2008). Sparse permutation
invariant covariance estimation. Electron. J. Stat. 2 494вҖ“515. MR2417391
[30] Speed, T. P. and Kiiveri, H. T. (1986). Gaussian Markov distributions over finite
graphs. Ann. Statist. 14 138вҖ“150. MR0829559
[31] Toh, K. C., Todd, M. J. and Tutuncu, R. H. (1999). SDPT3вҖ”a MATLAB
software package for semidefinite-quadratic-linear programming. Available at
http://www.math.nus.edu.sg/~ mattohkc/sdpt3.html.
[32] Wainwright, M. J. (2009). Sharp thresholds for high-dimensional and noisy sparsity recovery using в„“1 -constrained quadratic programming (Lasso). IEEE Trans.
Inform. Theory 55 2183вҖ“2202. MR2729873
[33] Wang, C., Sun, D. and Toh, K.-C. (2010). Solving log-determinant optimization
problems by a Newton-CG primal proximal point algorithm. SIAM J. Optim.
20 2994вҖ“3013. MR2735941
[34] Watson, G. A. (1992). Characterization of the subdifferential of some matrix norms.
Linear Algebra Appl. 170 33вҖ“45. MR1160950
[35] Witten, D. M., Tibshirani, R. and Hastie, T. (2009). A penalized matrix decomposition, with applications to sparse principal components and canonical
correlation analysis. Biostatistics 10 515вҖ“534.
[36] Wu, W. B. and Pourahmadi, M. (2003). Nonparametric estimation of large covariance matrices of longitudinal data. Biometrika 90 831вҖ“844. MR2024760
[37] Zhao, P. and Yu, B. (2006). On model selection consistency of Lasso. J. Mach.
Learn. Res. 7 2541вҖ“2563. MR2274449
V. Chandrasekaran
Department of Computing
and Mathematical Sciences
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, California 91106
USA
E-mail: venkatc@caltech.edu

P. A. Parrilo
A. S. Willsky
Laboratory for Information
and Decision Systems
Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139
USA
E-mail: parrilo@mit.edu
willsky@mit.edu

